JavaScript Team Roadmap 2023 / Updated Q2 and Q3 Roadmaps for 2022 (#27)
ethereum/js-team-organization: roadmap/EF2023.md

substantially from this initial roadmap throughout the year.

See our "live" [roadmap](./README.md) document for an up-to-date overview on what we
are currently up to.

## Tracks

The roadmap is divided into the following "tracks", identifying our main focus areas
for the year.

### DevEx & VM

The [EthereumJS](https://github.com/ethereumjs/ethereumjs-monorepo) libraries are often used in a development context, serving e.g. as an integral part of main Ethereum developer tools or as building blocks for browser UIs of decentralized applications (dApps). Improving the experience when working with our libraries is therefore a crucial part of our work, with the VM playing a special role here due to the central place it takes in development tools like Hardhat, Truffle or Remix.

### Hardforks & EIPs

Implementing hardforks and providing early-on access to the added or changed functionality in development tools takes a reoccurring share in our work. We also do selected implementations of dedicated EIPs not yet "hardfork-settled" where it makes sense and help on improving EIP specifications and tests.

### Research, Client & Testnets

> 

Reviewer: I don't know where this fits in the timeline but I would really love to get our browser client up and running again.  Now that CL light clients are a thing, it would be really cool to pair that with an EL ethJS client running in something like light client mode.  We could pair it with the Lodestar light client and maybe even integrate the Ethers State Manager somehow to give us comprehensive access to state data.

Author: Have added for Q1.

The JavaScript team takes part in Ethereum protocol-related research especially in areas where possible future applications in a TypeScript/JavaScript/Web Browser context are on the horizon, going "stateless" is a good example here since it is desirable to have lightweight browser access to the Ethereum network. We use our EthereumJS [client implementation](https://github.com/ethereumjs/ethereumjs-monorepo/tree/master/packages/client) here as a research leveraging tool and for setting up fast-iterating functional testnets for early-on EIP testing in a multi-client context.

### Portal Network

The [Portal Network](https://github.com/ethereum/portal-network-specs) is a new peer-to-peer network topology for the Ethereum network (like devp2p) being built to allow for lightweight Ethereum (mainnet) protocol access and expose a JSON-RPC like interface along. The effort is led by [Piper Merriam](https://github.com/pipermerriam) and progress has been substantially advanced with specs laid out on a detailed level and two client implementations (Trin [Rust] and Fluffy [Nim]) underway.

> The EF JavaScript team has built a [prototype](https://github.com/acolytec3/portalnetwork) of this in 2021 to test its feasibility. In 2022 this became a steady project with a dedicated team and a full-featured JS-based Portal Network client is now developed within the realm of the [Ultralight](https://github.com/ethereumjs/ultralight) monorepo. 2023 will be the year where the Portal Network will get closer to a production state and hopefully early-on integrations with dAppps and/or Wallet providers can take place to test a wider roll-out of the new network topology.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The EF JavaScript team has built a [prototype](https://github.com/acolytec3/portalnetwork) of this in 2021 to test its feasibility. In 2022 this became a steady project with a dedicated team and a full-featured JS-based Portal Network client is now developed within the realm of the [Ultralight](https://github.com/ethereumjs/ultralight) monorepo. 2023 will be the year where the Portal Network will get closer to a production state and hopefully early-on integrations with dApps and/or Wallet providers can take place to test a wider roll-out of the new network topology.
```

Author: Fair enough, to many p-s. 😋

Will do these changes locally and close here, have too many other additions already in.

> 

Reviewer: It would be cool to integrate the History Network in production somewhere if we can find a candidate.  EthOS might be an interesting exploration since they have a light client embedded directly into the Android OS and could be fun to supplement that with Ultralight (or provide as an alternative installation)

Author: Have added:

```md
- History Network Reference Production Integration (e.g. EthOS, other) Analysis
```

to Q3 and...

```md
- History Network Reference Production Integration Partnership (based on Q3 analysis)
```

to Q4.

### Ethers.js

> The [Ethers.js](https://github.com/ethers-io/ethers.js) library is one of the most popular connector and wallet libraries used to and interact with the Ethereum network. Primarily maintained by [Richard Moore](https://github.com/ricmoo) the library is downloaded by far over 1 million users and developers each month. To further develop and maintain the library is therefore crucial to support the large community which has grown around the library over the years.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [Ethers.js](https://github.com/ethers-io/ethers.js) library is one of the most popular tooling libraries used to and interact with the Ethereum network. Primarily maintained by [Richard Moore](https://github.com/ricmoo) the library is downloaded by far over 1 million users and developers each month. To further develop and maintain the library is therefore crucial to support the large community which has grown around the library over the years.
```
Since Ethers does so many things, I'd call it a "tooling library" as it does more that connectivity/wallet imo (e.g. utils for parsing/encoding/decoding etc.)

Author: 👍

---

## Q1

### DevEx & VM

> 

Reviewer: We should make ESM support a major priority in 2023.  Our browser client setup is really stuck until we migrate to ESM and it would be nice to take this leap.  I think the DevEx goal would be to migrate all of our code to ESM and then provide CJS builds based on the ESM modules (using Rollup or some other bundler if needed).

Author: Have added both (also see chat exchange), would be good if we can add issues for both of these biggish tasks, bundling together what we have and build upon together with the new setup/structures that we are tackling.

Also good to have these as some reference places for community feeback and the like.

- VM/EVM Performance Improvements (Memory Management, Others)

> - VM/EVM (Other) Post-Breaking Release API Optimizations

Reviewer: Would love to make sure we get full EVM standalone capabilities in Q1 (i.e. finish the dummy EEI PR that @jochem-brouwer started a while back)

Author: Ah, that's a great point, will add! ❤️

- VM/EVM Optimism L2 Support Feasibility Analysis

### Hardforks & EIPs

> - EIP-4844 Shard Blob Transactions Draft & Local Geth Testnet Integration

Reviewer: If I have my way, I'll have this done before the end of the year (but I guess better to underpromise and over deliver on this front).

Author: 👍

- EIP-4844 Shard Blob Transactions KZG Library Analysis & Integration
- EIP-4895 Beacon Chain Withdrawals (Shanghai) Spec Finalization
- EOF Implementation: EIP-4200 Static Relative Jumps
- EOF Implementation: EIP-4750 EOF Functions

### Research & Client

> - EthereumJS Client "Condrieu" Verkle Testnet integration / Proof Verification
> - Verkle Tree Specification Work & Performance Analysis

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Integration of the EthereumJS Client with Verkle Testnets (Condrieu, Beverly Hills, and Future Ones)
- Verkle Trie "Stateless" State Management and Proof Verification
- Verkle Tree Specification Work & Performance Analysis
```
